README.md, before:

# SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Object Detector, in PyTorch
A [PyTorch](http://pytorch.org/) implementation of [Single Shot MultiBox Detector](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325) from the 2016 paper by Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed, Cheng-Yang, and Alexander C. Berg.  The official and original Caffe code can be found [here](https://github.com/weiliu89/caffe/tree/ssd).  


<img align="right" src= "https://github.com/amdegroot/ssd.pytorch/blob/master/doc/ssd.png" height = 400/>

### Table of Contents
- <a href='#installation'>Installation</a>
- <a href='#datasets'>Datasets</a>
- <a href='#training-ssd'>Train</a>
- <a href='#evaluation'>Evaluate</a>
- <a href='#performance-in-progress'>Performance</a>
- <a href='#demos'>Demos</a>
- <a href='#todo'>Future Work</a>
- <a href='#references'>Reference</a>

&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

## Installation
- Install [PyTorch](http://pytorch.org/) by selecting your environment on the website and running the appropriate command.
- Clone this repository.
  * Note: We currently only support Python 3+.
- Then download the dataset by following the [instructions](#download-voc2007-trainval--test) below.
- We now support [Visdom](https://github.com/facebookresearch/visdom) for real-time loss visualization during training! 
  * To use Visdom in the browser: 
  ```Shell
  # First install Python server and client 
  pip install visdom
  # Start the server (probably in a screen or tmux)
  python -m visdom.server
  ```
  * Then (during training) navigate to http://localhost:8097/ (see the Train section below for training details).
- Note: For training, we currently only support [VOC](http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/), but are adding [COCO](http://mscoco.org/) and hopefully [ImageNet](http://www.image-net.org/) soon.
- UPDATE: We have switched from PIL Image support to cv2 as it is more accurate and significantly faster. 

## Datasets
To make things easy, we provide a simple VOC dataset loader that enherits `torch.utils.data.Dataset` making it fully compatible with the `torchvision.datasets` [API](http://pytorch.org/docs/torchvision/datasets.html).

### VOC Dataset
##### Download VOC2007 trainval & test

```Shell
# specify a directory for dataset to be downloaded into, else default is ~/data/
sh data/scripts/VOC2007.sh # <directory>
```

##### Download VOC2012 trainval

```Shell
# specify a directory for dataset to be downloaded into, else default is ~/data/
sh data/scripts/VOC2012.sh # <directory>
```

 Ensure the following directory structure (as specified in [VOCdevkit](http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2007/devkit_doc_07-Jun-2007.pdf)):

```
VOCdevkit/                                  % development kit
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/ImageSets                 % image sets
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/Annotations               % annotation files
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/JPEGImages                % images
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/SegmentationObject        % segmentations by object
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/SegmentationClass         % segmentations by class
```

## Training SSD
- First download the fc-reduced [VGG-16](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556) PyTorch base network weights at:              https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/vgg16_reducedfc.pth
- By default, we assume you have downloaded the file in the `ssd.pytorch/weights` dir:

```Shell
mkdir weights
cd weights
wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/vgg16_reducedfc.pth
```

- To train SSD using the train script simply specify the parameters listed in `train.py` as a flag or manually change them.

```Shell
python train.py
```
- Training Parameter Options: 

```Python
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description='Single Shot MultiBox Detector Training')
parser.add_argument('--version', default='v2', help='conv11_2(v2) or pool6(v1) as last layer')
parser.add_argument('--basenet', default='vgg16_reducedfc.pth', help='pretrained base model')
parser.add_argument('--jaccard_threshold', default=0.5, type=float, help='Min Jaccard index for matching')
parser.add_argument('--batch_size', default=32, type=int, help='Batch size for training')
parser.add_argument('--num_workers', default=4, type=int, help='Number of workers used in dataloading')
parser.add_argument('--iterations', default=120000, type=int, help='Number of training epochs')
parser.add_argument('--cuda', default=True, type=bool, help='Use cuda to train model')
parser.add_argument('--lr', '--learning-rate', default=1e-3, type=float, help='initial learning rate')
parser.add_argument('--momentum', default=0.9, type=float, help='momentum')
parser.add_argument('--weight_decay', default=5e-4, type=float, help='Weight decay for SGD')
parser.add_argument('--gamma', default=0.1, type=float, help='Gamma update for SGD')
parser.add_argument('--log_iters', default=True, type=bool, help='Print the loss at each iteration')
parser.add_argument('--visdom', default=False, type=bool, help='Use visdom to for loss visualization')
parser.add_argument('--save_folder', default='weights/', help='Location to save checkpoint models')
args = parser.parse_args()
```
- Note:
  * For training, an NVIDIA GPU is strongly recommended for speed.
  * Currently we only support training on v2 (the newest version).
  * For instructions on Visdom usage/installation, see the <a href='#installation'>Installation</a> section.
  
## Evaluation
To evaluate a trained network:

```Shell
python test.py
```

You can specify the parameters listed in the `test.py` file by flagging them or manually changing them.  


<img align="left" src= "https://github.com/amdegroot/ssd.pytorch/blob/master/doc/detection_examples.png">

## Performance *(In progress)*

#### VOC2007 Test

##### mAP

| Original | Test (weiliu89 weights) | Train (w/o data aug) and Test\* |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 77.2 % | 77.26 % | 58.12%**\*** |

**\* note:** Obtained with a constant learning rate of 1e-4 @15k iterations. With proper adjustment, we believe this should increase substantially even w/o data aug.

##### FPS
**GTX 1060:** ~45.45 FPS for detection on a single image

## Demos

### Use a pre-trained SSD network for detection

#### Download a pre-trained network
- We are trying to provide PyTorch `state_dicts` (dict of weight tensors) of the latest SSD model definitions trained on different datasets.  
- Currently, we provide the following PyTorch models: 
    * SSD300 v2 trained on VOC0712 (newest version)
      - https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/ssd_300_VOC0712.pth
    * SSD300 v1 (original/old pool6 version) trained on VOC07
      - https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/ssd_300_voc07.tar.gz
- Our goal is to reproduce this table from the [original paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325) 
<p align="left">
<img src="http://www.cs.unc.edu/~wliu/papers/ssd_results.png" alt="SSD results on multiple datasets" width="800px"></p>

### Try the demo notebook
- Make sure you have [jupyter notebook](http://jupyter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html) installed.
- Two alternatives for installing jupyter notebook:
    1. If you installed PyTorch with [conda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads) (recommended), then you should already have it.  (Just  navigate to the ssd.pytorch cloned repo and run): 
    `jupyter notebook` 

    2. If using [pip](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip):
    
```Shell
# make sure pip is upgraded
pip3 install --upgrade pip
# install jupyter notebook
pip install jupyter
# Run this inside ssd.pytorch
jupyter notebook
```

- Now navigate to `demo/demo.ipynb` at http://localhost:8888 (by default) and have at it!

### Try the webcam demo
- Works on CPU (may have to tweak `cv2.waitkey` for optimal fps) or on an NVIDIA GPU
- This demo currently requires opencv2+ w/ python bindings and an onboard webcam
  * You can change the default webcam in `demo/live.py`
- Running `python -m demo.live` opens the webcam and begins detecting!

## TODO
We have accumulated the following to-do list, which you can expect to be done in the very near future
- In progress:
  * Complete data augmentation (progress in augmentation branch)
  * Produce a "from scratch" PyTorch mAP matching the original Caffe result
- Still to come:
  * Train SSD300 with batch norm
  * Add support for SSD512 training and testing
  * Add support for COCO dataset
  * Create a functional model definition for Sergey Zagoruyko's [functional-zoo](https://github.com/szagoruyko/functional-zoo)


## References
- Wei Liu, et al. "SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector." [ECCV2016]((http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325)).
- [Original Implementation (CAFFE)](https://github.com/weiliu89/caffe/tree/ssd)
- A list of other great SSD ports that were sources of inspiration (especially the Chainer repo): 
  * [Chainer](https://github.com/Hakuyume/chainer-ssd), [Keras](https://github.com/rykov8/ssd_keras), [MXNet](https://github.com/zhreshold/mxnet-ssd), [Tensorflow](https://github.com/balancap/SSD-Tensorflow)

Commit message:

Include imutils in webcam live demo

README.md, after:

# SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Object Detector, in PyTorch
A [PyTorch](http://pytorch.org/) implementation of [Single Shot MultiBox Detector](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325) from the 2016 paper by Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed, Cheng-Yang, and Alexander C. Berg.  The official and original Caffe code can be found [here](https://github.com/weiliu89/caffe/tree/ssd).  


<img align="right" src= "https://github.com/amdegroot/ssd.pytorch/blob/master/doc/ssd.png" height = 400/>

### Table of Contents
- <a href='#installation'>Installation</a>
- <a href='#datasets'>Datasets</a>
- <a href='#training-ssd'>Train</a>
- <a href='#evaluation'>Evaluate</a>
- <a href='#performance-in-progress'>Performance</a>
- <a href='#demos'>Demos</a>
- <a href='#todo'>Future Work</a>
- <a href='#references'>Reference</a>

&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;

## Installation
- Install [PyTorch](http://pytorch.org/) by selecting your environment on the website and running the appropriate command.
- Clone this repository.
  * Note: We currently only support Python 3+.
- Then download the dataset by following the [instructions](#download-voc2007-trainval--test) below.
- We now support [Visdom](https://github.com/facebookresearch/visdom) for real-time loss visualization during training! 
  * To use Visdom in the browser: 
  ```Shell
  # First install Python server and client 
  pip install visdom
  # Start the server (probably in a screen or tmux)
  python -m visdom.server
  ```
  * Then (during training) navigate to http://localhost:8097/ (see the Train section below for training details).
- Note: For training, we currently only support [VOC](http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/), but are adding [COCO](http://mscoco.org/) and hopefully [ImageNet](http://www.image-net.org/) soon.
- UPDATE: We have switched from PIL Image support to cv2 as it is more accurate and significantly faster. 

## Datasets
To make things easy, we provide a simple VOC dataset loader that enherits `torch.utils.data.Dataset` making it fully compatible with the `torchvision.datasets` [API](http://pytorch.org/docs/torchvision/datasets.html).

### VOC Dataset
##### Download VOC2007 trainval & test

```Shell
# specify a directory for dataset to be downloaded into, else default is ~/data/
sh data/scripts/VOC2007.sh # <directory>
```

##### Download VOC2012 trainval

```Shell
# specify a directory for dataset to be downloaded into, else default is ~/data/
sh data/scripts/VOC2012.sh # <directory>
```

 Ensure the following directory structure (as specified in [VOCdevkit](http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2007/devkit_doc_07-Jun-2007.pdf)):

```
VOCdevkit/                                  % development kit
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/ImageSets                 % image sets
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/Annotations               % annotation files
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/JPEGImages                % images
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/SegmentationObject        % segmentations by object
VOCdevkit/VOC2007/SegmentationClass         % segmentations by class
```

## Training SSD
- First download the fc-reduced [VGG-16](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556) PyTorch base network weights at:              https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/vgg16_reducedfc.pth
- By default, we assume you have downloaded the file in the `ssd.pytorch/weights` dir:

```Shell
mkdir weights
cd weights
wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/vgg16_reducedfc.pth
```

- To train SSD using the train script simply specify the parameters listed in `train.py` as a flag or manually change them.

```Shell
python train.py
```
- Training Parameter Options: 

```Python
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description='Single Shot MultiBox Detector Training')
parser.add_argument('--version', default='v2', help='conv11_2(v2) or pool6(v1) as last layer')
parser.add_argument('--basenet', default='vgg16_reducedfc.pth', help='pretrained base model')
parser.add_argument('--jaccard_threshold', default=0.5, type=float, help='Min Jaccard index for matching')
parser.add_argument('--batch_size', default=32, type=int, help='Batch size for training')
parser.add_argument('--num_workers', default=4, type=int, help='Number of workers used in dataloading')
parser.add_argument('--iterations', default=120000, type=int, help='Number of training epochs')
parser.add_argument('--cuda', default=True, type=bool, help='Use cuda to train model')
parser.add_argument('--lr', '--learning-rate', default=1e-3, type=float, help='initial learning rate')
parser.add_argument('--momentum', default=0.9, type=float, help='momentum')
parser.add_argument('--weight_decay', default=5e-4, type=float, help='Weight decay for SGD')
parser.add_argument('--gamma', default=0.1, type=float, help='Gamma update for SGD')
parser.add_argument('--log_iters', default=True, type=bool, help='Print the loss at each iteration')
parser.add_argument('--visdom', default=False, type=bool, help='Use visdom to for loss visualization')
parser.add_argument('--save_folder', default='weights/', help='Location to save checkpoint models')
args = parser.parse_args()
```
- Note:
  * For training, an NVIDIA GPU is strongly recommended for speed.
  * Currently we only support training on v2 (the newest version).
  * For instructions on Visdom usage/installation, see the <a href='#installation'>Installation</a> section.
  
## Evaluation
To evaluate a trained network:

```Shell
python test.py
```

You can specify the parameters listed in the `test.py` file by flagging them or manually changing them.  


<img align="left" src= "https://github.com/amdegroot/ssd.pytorch/blob/master/doc/detection_examples.png">

## Performance *(In progress)*

#### VOC2007 Test

##### mAP

| Original | Test (weiliu89 weights) | Train (w/o data aug) and Test\* |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 77.2 % | 77.26 % | 58.12%**\*** |

**\* note:** Obtained with a constant learning rate of 1e-4 @15k iterations. With proper adjustment, we believe this should increase substantially even w/o data aug.

##### FPS
**GTX 1060:** ~45.45 FPS for detection on a single image

## Demos

### Use a pre-trained SSD network for detection

#### Download a pre-trained network
- We are trying to provide PyTorch `state_dicts` (dict of weight tensors) of the latest SSD model definitions trained on different datasets.  
- Currently, we provide the following PyTorch models: 
    * SSD300 v2 trained on VOC0712 (newest version)
      - https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/ssd_300_VOC0712.pth
    * SSD300 v1 (original/old pool6 version) trained on VOC07
      - https://s3.amazonaws.com/amdegroot-models/ssd_300_voc07.tar.gz
- Our goal is to reproduce this table from the [original paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325) 
<p align="left">
<img src="http://www.cs.unc.edu/~wliu/papers/ssd_results.png" alt="SSD results on multiple datasets" width="800px"></p>

### Try the demo notebook
- Make sure you have [jupyter notebook](http://jupyter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html) installed.
- Two alternatives for installing jupyter notebook:
    1. If you installed PyTorch with [conda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads) (recommended), then you should already have it.  (Just  navigate to the ssd.pytorch cloned repo and run): 
    `jupyter notebook` 

    2. If using [pip](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip):
    
```Shell
# make sure pip is upgraded
pip3 install --upgrade pip
# install jupyter notebook
pip install jupyter
# Run this inside ssd.pytorch
jupyter notebook
```

- Now navigate to `demo/demo.ipynb` at http://localhost:8888 (by default) and have at it!

### Try the webcam demo
- Works on CPU (may have to tweak `cv2.waitkey` for optimal fps) or on an NVIDIA GPU
- This demo currently requires opencv2+ w/ python bindings and an onboard webcam
  * You can change the default webcam in `demo/live.py`
- Install the [imutils](https://github.com/jrosebr1/imutils) package to leverage multi-threading on CPU:
  * `pip install imutils`
- Running `python -m demo.live` opens the webcam and begins detecting!

## TODO
We have accumulated the following to-do list, which you can expect to be done in the very near future
- In progress:
  * Complete data augmentation (progress in augmentation branch)
  * Produce a "from scratch" PyTorch mAP matching the original Caffe result
- Still to come:
  * Train SSD300 with batch norm
  * Add support for SSD512 training and testing
  * Add support for COCO dataset
  * Create a functional model definition for Sergey Zagoruyko's [functional-zoo](https://github.com/szagoruyko/functional-zoo)


## References
- Wei Liu, et al. "SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector." [ECCV2016]((http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325)).
- [Original Implementation (CAFFE)](https://github.com/weiliu89/caffe/tree/ssd)
- A list of other great SSD ports that were sources of inspiration (especially the Chainer repo): 
  * [Chainer](https://github.com/Hakuyume/chainer-ssd), [Keras](https://github.com/rykov8/ssd_keras), [MXNet](https://github.com/zhreshold/mxnet-ssd), [Tensorflow](https://github.com/balancap/SSD-Tensorflow)
